Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦Severe recurrent temper outbursts manifested verbally (e.g., verbal rages) and/or behaviorally (e.g., physical aggression toward people or property) that are grossly out of proportion in intensity or duration to the situation or provocation.
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦The temper outbursts are inconsistent with developmental level.
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦The temper outbursts occur, on average, three or more times per week.
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦The mood between temper outbursts is persistently irritable or angry most of the day, nearly every day, and is observable by others (e.g., parents, teachers, peers).
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦Criteria A-D have been present for 12 or more months. Throughout that time, the individual has not had a period lasting 3 or more consecutive months without all of the symptoms in Criteria A-D.
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦Criteria A and D are present in at least two of three settings (i.e., at home, at school, with peers) and are severe in at least one of these.
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦The diagnosis should not be made for the first time before age 6 years or after age 18 years.
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦By history or observation, the age at onset of Criteria A-E is before 10 years.
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦There has never been a distinct period lasting more than 1 day during which the full symptom criteria, except duration, for a manic or hypomanie episode have been met. Note: Developmentally appropriate mood elevation, such as occurs in the context of a highly positive event or its anticipation, should not be considered as a symptom of mania or hypomania.
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦The behaviors do not occur exclusively during an episode of major depressive disorder and are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., autism spectrum disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, separation anxiety disorder, persistent depressive disorder [dysthymia]). Note: This diagnosis cannot coexist with oppositional defiant disorder, intermittent explosive disorder, or bipolar disorder, though it can coexist with others, including major depressive disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, conduct disorder, and substance use disorders. Individuals whose symptoms meet criteria for both disruptive mood dysregulation disorder and oppositional defiant disorder should only be given the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. If an individual has ever experienced a manic or hypomanie episode, the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder should not be assigned.
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or to another medical or neurological condition.
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder | Diagnostic Features¦The core feature of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is chronic, severe persistent irritabihty. This severe irritability has two prominent clinical manifestations, the first of which is frequent temper outbursts. These outbursts typically occur in response to frustration and can be verbal or behavioral (the latter in the form of aggression against property, self, or others). They must occur frequently (i.e., on average, three or more times per week) (Criterion C) over at least 1 year in at least two settings (Criteria E and F), such as in the home and at school, and they must be developmentally inappropriate (Criterion B). The second manifestation of severe irritability consists of chronic, persistently irritable or angry mood that is present between the severe temper outbursts. This irritable or angry mood must be characteristic of the child, being present most of the day, nearly every day, and noticeable by others in the child's environment (Criterion D).
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder | Diagnostic Features¦The clinical presentation of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder must be carefully distinguished from presentations of other, related conditions, particularly pediatric bipolar disorder. 
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder | Development and Course¦The onset of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder must be before age 10 years, and the diagnosis should not be applied to children with a developmental age of less than 6 years. It is unknown whether the condition presents only in this age-delimited fashion. Because the symptoms of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder are likely to change as children mature, use of the diagnosis should be restricted to age groups similar to those in which validity has been established (7-18 years). Approximately half of children with severe, chronic irritability will have a presentation that continues to meet criteria for the condition 1 year later. Rates of conversion from severe, nonepisodic irritability to bipolar disorder are very low. Instead, children with chronic irritability are at risk to develop unipolar depressive and/or anxiety disorders in adulthood.
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder | Development and Course¦Age-related variations also differentiate classic bipolar disorder and disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Rates of bipolar disorder generally are very low prior to adolescence (<1%), with a steady increase into early adulthood (l%-2% prevalence). Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is more common than bipolar disorder prior to adolescence, and symptoms of the condition generally become less common as children transition into adulthood.
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder | Differential Diagnosis || Bipolar disorders¦The central feature differentiating disruptive mood dysregulation disorder and bipolar disorders in children involves the longitudinal course of the core s}nTiptoms. In children, as in adults, bipolar I disorder and bipolar Π disorder manifest as an episodic illness with discrete episodes of mood perturbation that can be differentiated from the child's typical presentation. The mood perturbation that occurs during a manic episode is distinctly different from the child's usual mood. In addition, during a manic episode, the change in mood must be accompanied by the onset, or worsening, of associated cognitive, behavioral, and physical symptoms (e.g., distractibility, increased goal-directed activity), which are also present to a degree that is distinctly different from the child's usual baseline. Thus, in the case of a manic episode, parents (and, depending on developmental level, children) should be able to identify a distinct time period during which the child's mood and behavior were markedly different from usual. In contrast, the irritability of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is persistent and is present over many months; while it may wax and wane to a certain degree, severe irritability is characteristic of the child with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Thus, while bipolar disorders are episodic conditions, disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is not. In fact, the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder cannot be assigned to a child who has ever experienced a fuU-duration hypomanie or manic episode (irritable or euphoric) or who has ever had a manic or hypomanie episode lasting more than 1 day. Another central differentiating feature between bipolar disorders and disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is the presence of elevated or expansive mood and grandiosity. These symptoms are common features of mania but are not characteristic of disruptive m ood dysregulation disorder.
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder | Differential Diagnosis || Oppositional defiant disorder¦While symptoms of oppositional defiant disorder typically do occur in children with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, mood symptoms of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder are relatively rare in children with oppositional defiant disorder. The key features that warrant the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder in children whose symptoms also meet criteria for oppositional defiant disorder are the presence of severe and frequently recurrent outbursts and a persistent disruption in mood between outbursts. In addition, the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder requires severe impairment in at least one setting (i.e., home, school, or among peers) and mild to moderate impairment in a second setting. For this reason, while most children whose symptoms meet criteria for disruptive mood dysregulation disorder will also have a presentation that meets criteria for oppositional defiant disorder, the reverse is not the case. That is, in only approximately 15% of individuals with oppositional defiant disorder would criteria for disruptive mood dysregulation disorder be met. Moreover, even for children in whom criteria for both disorders are met, only the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder should be made. Finally, both the prominent mood symptoms in disruptive mood dysregulation disorder and the high risk for depressive and anxiety disorders in follow-up studies justify placement of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder among the depressive disorders in DSM-5. (Oppositional defiant disorder is included in the chapter "Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders.") This reflects the more prominent mood component among individuals with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, as compared with individuals with oppositional defiant disorder. Nevertheless, it also should be noted that disruptive mood dysregulation disorder appears to carry a high risk for behavioral problems as well as mood problems.
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder | Differential Diagnosis || Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, major depressive disorder, anxiety disorders, and autism spectrum disorder¦Unlike children diagnosed with bipolar disorder or oppositional defiant disorder, a child whose symptoms meet criteria for disruptive mood dysregulation disorder also can receive a comorbid diagnosis of ADHD, major depressive disorder, and/or anxiety disorder. However, children whose irritability is present only in the context of a major depressive episode or persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia) should receive one of those diagnoses rather than disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Children with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder may have symptoms that also meet criteria for an anxiety disorder and can receive both diagnoses, but children whose irritability is manifest only in the context of exacerbation of an anxiety disorder should receive the relevant anxiety disorder diagnosis rather than disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. In addition, children with autism spectrum disorders frequently present with temper outbursts when, for example, their routines are disturbed. In that instance, the temper outbursts would be considered secondary to the autism spectrum disorder, and the child should not receive the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder | Differential Diagnosis || Intermittent explosive disorder¦Children with symptoms suggestive of intermittent explosive disorder present with instances of severe temper outbursts, much like children with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. However, unlike disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, intermittent explosive disorder does not require persistent disruption in  mood between outbursts. In addition, intermittent explosive disorder requires only 3 months of active symptoms, in contrast to the 12-month requirement for disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Thus, these two diagnoses should not be made in the same child. For children with outbursts and intercurrent, persistent irritability, only the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder should be made.
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦Five (or more) of the following symptoms have been present during the same 2-week period and represent a change from previous functioning: at least one of the symptoms is either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or pleasure.
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by either subjective report (e.g., feels sad, empty, hopeless) or observation made by others (e.g.,appears tearful). (Note: In children and adolescents, can be irritable mood.)
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities most of the day, nearly every day (as indicated by either subjective account or observation).
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦Significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g., a change of more than 5% of body weight in a month), or decrease or increase in appetite nearly every day. 
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day.
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable by others, not merely subjective feelings of restlessness or being slowed down).
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (which may be delusional) nearly every day (not merely self-reproach or guilt about being sick).
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly every day (either by subjective account or as observed by others).
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal ideation without a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for committing suicide.
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or to another medical condition.
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦The occurrence of the major depressive episode is not better explained by schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, or other specified and unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦There has never been a manic episode or a hypomanie episode.
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Features¦The criterion symptoms for major depressive disorder must be present nearly every day to be considered present, with the exception of weight change and suicidal ideation. Depressed mood must be present for most of the day, in addition to being present nearly every day. Often insomnia or fatigue is the presenting complaint, and failure to probe for accompanying depressive symptoms will result in underdiagnosis. Sadness may be denied at first but may be elicited through interview or inferred from facial expression and demeanor. With individuals who focus on a somatic complaint, clinicians should determine whether the distress from that complaint is associated with specific depressive symptoms. Fatigue and sleep disturbance are present in a high proportion of cases; psychomotor disturbances are much less common but are indicative of greater overall severity, as is the presence of delusional or near-delusional guilt.
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Features¦The essential feature of a major depressive episode is a period of at least 2 weeks during which there is either depressed mood or the loss of interest or pleasure in nearly all activities . In children and adolescents, the mood may be irritable rather than sad. The individual must also experience at least four additional symptoms drawn from a list that includes changes in appetite or weight, sleep, and psychomotor activity; decreased energy; feelings of worthlessness or guilt; difficulty thinking, concentrating, or making decisions; or recurrent thoughts of death or suicidal ideation or suicide plans or attempts. To count toward a major depressive episode, a symptom must either be newly present or must have clearly worsened compared with the person's pre-episode status. The symptoms must persist for most of the day, nearly every day, for at least 2 consecutive weeks. The episode must be accompanied by clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. For some individuals with milder episodes, functioning may appear to be normal but requires markedly increased effort.
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Features¦The mood in a major depressive episode is often described by the person as depressed, sad, hopeless, discouraged, or "down in the dumps" . In some cases, sadness may be denied at first but may subsequently be elicited by interview (e.g., by pointing out that the individual looks as if he or she is about to cry). In some individuals who complain of feeling "blah," having no feelings, or feeling anxious, the presence of a depressed mood can be inferred from the person's facial expression and demeanor. Some individuals emphasize somatic complaints (e.g., bodily aches and pains) rather than reporting feelings of sadness. Many individuals report or exhibit increased irritability (e.g., persistent anger, a tendency to respond to events with angry outbursts or blaming others, an exaggerated sense of frustration over minor matters). In children and adolescents, an irritable or cranky mood may develop rather than a sad or dejected mood. This presentation should be differentiated from a pattern of irritability when frustrated.
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Features¦Loss of interest or pleasure is nearly always present, at least to some degree. Individuals may report feeling less interested in hobbies, "not caring anymore," or not feeling any enjoyment in activities that were previously considered pleasurable. Family members often notice social withdrawal or neglect of pleasurable avocations (e.g., a formerly avid golfer no longer plays, a child who used to enjoy soccer finds excuses not to practice). In some individuals, there is a significant reduction from previous levels of sexual interest or desire.
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Features¦Appetite change may involve either a reduction or increase. Some depressed individuals report that they have to force themselves to eat. Others may eat more and may crave specific foods (e.g., sweets or other carbohydrates). When appetite changes are severe (in either direction), there may be a significant loss or gain in weight, or, in children, a failure to make expected weight gains may be noted.
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Features¦Sleep disturbance may take the form of either difficulty sleeping or sleeping excessively. When insomnia is present, it typically takes the form of middle insonrmia (i.e., waking up during the night and then having difficulty returning to sleep) or terminal insomnia (i.e., waking too early and being unable to return to sleep). Initial insomnia (i.e., difficulty falling asleep) may also occur. Individuals who present with oversleeping (hypersomnia) may experience prolonged sleep episodes at night or increased daytime sleep. Sometimes the reason that the individual seeks treatment is for the disturbed sleep
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Features¦Psychomotor changes include agitation (e.g., the inability to sit still, pacing, handwringing; or pulling or rubbing of the skin, clothing, or other objects) or retardation (e.g., slowed speech, thinking, and body movements; increased pauses before answering; speech that is decreased in volume, inflection, amount, or variety of content, or muteness). The psychomotor agitation or retardation must be severe enough to be observable by others and not represent merely subjective feelings.
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Features¦Decreased energy, tiredness, and fatigue are common. A person may report sustained fatigue without physical exertion. Even the smallest tasks seem to require substantial effort. The efficiency with which tasks are accomplished may be reduced. For example, an individual may complain that washing and dressing in the morning are exhausting and take twice as long as usual.
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Features¦The sense of worthlessness or guilt associated with a major depressive episode may include unrealistic negative evaluations of one's worth or guilty preoccupations or ruminations over minor past failings. Such individuals often misinterpret neutral or trivial day-to-day events as evidence of personal defects and have an exaggerated sense of responsibility for untoward events. The sense of worthlessness or guilt may be of delusional proportions (e.g., an individual who is convinced that he or she is personally responsible for world poverty). Blaming oneself for being sick and for failing to meet occupational or inteφersonal responsibilities as a result of the depression is very common and, unless delusional, is not considered sufficient to meet this criterion.
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Features¦Many individuals report impaired ability to think, concentrate, or make even minor decisions. They may appear easily distracted or complain of memory difficulties. Those engaged in cognitively demanding pursuits are often unable to function. In children, a precipitous drop in grades may reflect poor concentration. In elderly individuals, memory difficulties may be the chief complaint and may be mistaken for early signs of a dementia (''pseudodementia"). When the major depressive episode is successfully treated, the memory problems often fully abate. However, in some individuals, particularly elderly persons, a major depressive episode may sometimes be the initial presentation of an irreversible dementia.
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Features¦Thoughts of death, suicidal ideation, or suicide attempts are common. They may range from a passive wish not to awaken in the morning or a belief that others would be better off if the individual were dead, to transient but recurrent thoughts of committing suicide, to a specific suicide plan. More severely suicidal individuals may have put  their affairs in order (e.g., updated wills, settled debts), acquired needed materials (e.g., a rope or a gun), and chosen a location and time to accomplish the suicide. Motivations for suicide may include a desire to give up in the face of perceived insurmountable obstacles, an intense wish to end what is perceived as an unending and excruciatingly painful emotional state, an inability to foresee any enjoyment in life, or the wish to not be a burden to others. The resolution of such thinking may be a more meaningful measure of diminished suicide risk than denial of further plans for suicide.
Major Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Features¦The evaluation of the symptoms of a major depressive episode is especially difficult when they occur in an individual who also has a general medical condition (e.g., cancer, stroke, myocardial infarction, diabetes, pregnancy). Some of the criterion signs and symptoms of a major depressive episode are identical to those of general medical conditions (e.g., weight loss with untreated diabetes; fatigue with cancer; hypersomnia early in pregnancy; insonmia later in pregnancy or the postpartum). Such symptoms count toward a major depressive diagnosis except when they are clearly and fully attributable to a general medical condition. Nonvegetative symptoms of dysphoria, anhedonia, guilt or worthlessness, impaired concentration or indecision, and suicidal thoughts should be assessed with particular care in such cases. Definitions of major depressive episodes that have been modified to include only these nonvegetative symptoms appear to identify nearly the same individuals as do the full criteria.
Major Depressive Disorder | Development and Course¦Major depressive disorder may first appear at any age, but the likelihood of onset increases markedly with puberty. In the United States, incidence appears to peak in the 20s; however, first onset in late life is not uncommon.
Major Depressive Disorder | Development and Course¦The course of major depressive disorder is quite variable, such that some individuals rarely, if ever, experience remission (a period of 2 or more months with no symptoms, or only one or two symptoms to no more than a mild degree), while others experience many years with few or no symptoms between discrete episodes. It is important to distinguish individuals who present for treatment during an exacerbation of a chronic depressive illness from those whose symptoms developed recently. Chronicity of depressive symptoms substantially increases the likelihood of underlying personality, anxiety, and substance use disorders and decreases the likelihood that treatment will be followed by full symptom resolution. It is therefore useful to ask individuals presenting with depressive symptoms to identify the last period of at least 2 months during which they were entirely free of depressive symptoms.
Major Depressive Disorder | Development and Course¦Recovery typically begins within 3 months of onset for two in five individuals with major depression and within 1 year for four in five individuals. Recency of onset is a strong determinant of the likelihood of near-term recovery, and many individuals who have been depressed only for several months can be expected to recover spontaneously. Features associated with lower recovery rates, other than current episode duration, include psychotic features, prominent anxiety, personality disorders, and symptom severity.
Major Depressive Disorder | Development and Course¦The risk of recurrence becomes progessively lower over time as the duration of remission increases. The risk is higher in individuals whose preceding episode was severe,  in younger individuals, and in individuals who have already experienced multiple episodes. The persistence of even mild depressive symptoms during remission is a powerful predictor of recurrence.
Major Depressive Disorder | Development and Course¦Many bipolar illnesses begin with one or more depressive episodes, and a substantial proportion of individuals who initially appear to have major depressive disorder will prove, in time, to instead have a bipolar disorder. This is more likely in individuals with onset of the illness in adolescence, those with psychotic features, and those with a family history of bipolar illness. The presence of a "'with mixed features" specifier also increases the risk for future manic or hypomanie diagnosis. Major depressive disorder, particularly with psychotic features, may also transition into schizophrenia, a change that is much more frequent than the reverse.
Major Depressive Disorder | Development and Course¦Despite consistent differences between genders in prevalence rates for depressive disorders, there appear to be no clear differences by gender in phenomenology, course, or treatment response. Similarly, there are no clear effects of current age on the course or treatment response of major depressive disorder. Some symptom differences exist, though, such that hypersomnia and hyperphagia are more likely in younger individuals, and melancholic symptoms, particularly psychomotor disturbances, are more common in older individuals. The likelihood of suicide attempts lessens in middle and late life, although the risk of completed suicide does not. Depressions with earlier ages at onset are more familial and more likely to involve personality disturbances. The course of major depressive disorder within individuals does not generally change with aging. Mean times to recovery appear to be stable over long periods, and the likelihood of being in an episode does not generally increase or decrease with time.
Major Depressive Disorder | Differential Diagnosis || Manic episodes with irritable mood or mixed episodes¦Major depressive episodes with prominent irritable mood may be difficult to distinguish from manic episodes with irritable mood or from mixed episodes. This distinction requires a careful clinical evaluation of the presence of manic symptoms.
Major Depressive Disorder | Differential Diagnosis || Mood disorder due to another medical condition¦A major depressive episode is the appropriate diagnosis if the mood disturbance is not judged, based on individual history, physical examination, and laboratory findings, to be the direct pathophysiological consequence of a specific medical condition (e.g., multiple sclerosis, stroke, hypothyroidism).
Major Depressive Disorder | Differential Diagnosis || Substance/medication-induced depressive or bipolar disorder¦This disorder is distinguished from major depressive disorder by the fact that a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, a toxin) appears to be etiologically related to the mood disturbance. For example, depressed mood that occurs only in the context of withdrawal from cocaine would be diagnosed as cocaine-induced depressive disorder.
Major Depressive Disorder | Differential Diagnosis || Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder¦Distractibility and low frustration tolerance can occur in both attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder and a major depressive episode; if the criteria are met for both, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder may be diagnosed in addition to the mood disorder. However, the clinician must be cautious not to overdiagnose a major depressive episode in children with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder whose disturbance in mood is characterized by irritability rather than by sadness or loss of interest.
Major Depressive Disorder | Differential Diagnosis || Adjustment disorder with depressed mood¦A major depressive episode that occurs in response to a psychosocial stressor is distinguished from adjustment disorder w^ith depressed mood by the fact that the full criteria for a major depressive episode are not met in adjustment disorder.
Major Depressive Disorder | Differential Diagnosis || Sadness¦Finally, periods of sadness are inherent aspects of the human experience. These periods should not be diagnosed as a major depressive episode unless criteria are met for severity (i.e., five out of nine symptoms), duration (i.e., most of the day, nearly every day for at least 2 w^eeks), and clinically significant distress or impairment. The diagnosis other specified depressive disorder may be appropriate for presentations of depressed mood wiih clinically significant impairment that do not meet criteria for duration or severity.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Diagnostic Criteria¦Depressed mood for most of the day, for more days than not, as indicated by either subjective account or observation by others, for at least 2 years.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Diagnostic Criteria¦Poor appetite or overeating.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Diagnostic Criteria¦Insomnia or hypersomnia.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Diagnostic Criteria¦Low energy or fatigue.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Diagnostic Criteria¦Low self-esteem.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Diagnostic Criteria¦Poor concentration or difficulty making decisions.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Diagnostic Criteria¦Feelings of hopelessness.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Diagnostic Criteria¦During the 2-year period (1 year for children or adolescents) of the disturbance, the individual has never been without the symptoms in Criteria A and B for more than 2 months at a time.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Diagnostic Criteria¦Criteria for a major depressive disorder may be continuously present for 2 years.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Diagnostic Criteria¦There has never been a manic episode or a hypomanie episode, and criteria have never been met for cyclothymic disorder.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Diagnostic Criteria¦The disturbance is not better explained by a persistent schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, delusional disorder, or other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Diagnostic Criteria¦The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition (e.g. hypothyroidism).
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Diagnostic Criteria¦The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Diagnostic Features¦The essential feature of persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia) is a depressed mood that occurs for most of the day, for more days than not, for at least 2 years, or at least 1 year for children and adolescents. Major depression may precede persistent depressive disorder, and major depressive episodes may occur during persistent depressive disorder. Individuals whose symptoms meet major depressive disorder criteria for 2 years should be given a diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder as well as major depressive disorder.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Diagnostic Features¦Individuals with persistent depressive disorder describe their mood as sad or "down in the dumps." During periods of depressed mood, at least two of the six symptoms from Criterion B are present. Because these symptoms have become a part of the individual's day-to-day experience, particularly in the case of early onset (e.g., "I've always been this way"), they may not be reported unless the individual is directly prompted. E>uring the 2-year period (1 year for children or adolescents), any symptom-free intervals last no longer than 2 months.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Development and Course¦Persistent depressive disorder often has an early and insidious onset (i.e., in childhood, adolescence, or early adult life) and, by definition, a chronic course. Among individuals with both persistent depressive disorder and borderline personality disorder, the covariance of the corresponding features over time suggests the operation of a common mechanism. Early onset (i.e., before age 21 years) is associated with a higher likelihood of comorbid personality disorders and substance use disorders.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Development and Course¦When symptoms rise to the level of a major depressive episode, they are likely to subsequently revert to a lower level. However, depressive symptoms are much less likely to resolve in a given period of time in the context of persistent depressive disorder than they are in a major depressive episode.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Differential Diagnosis || Major depressive disorder¦If there is a depressed mood plus two or more symptoms meeting criteria for a persistent depressive episode for 2 years or more, then the diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder is made. The diagnosis depends on the 2-year duration, which distinguishes it from episodes of depression that do not last 2 years. If the symptom criteria are sufficient for a diagnosis of a major depressive episode at any time during this period, then the diagnosis of major depression should be noted, but it is coded not as a separate diagnosis but rather as a specifier with the diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder. If the individual's symptoms currently meet full criteria for a major depressive episode, then the specifier of "with intermittent major depressive episodes, with current episode" would be made. If the major depressive episode has persisted for at least a 2-year duration and remains present, then the specifier "with persistent major depressive episode" is used. When full major depressive episode criteria are not currently met but there has been at least one previous episode of major depression in the context of at least 2 years of persistent depressive symptoms, then the specifier of "with intermittent major depressive episodes, without current episode" is used. If the individual has not experienced an episode of major depression in the last 2 years, then the specifier "with pure dysthymic syndrome" is used.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Differential Diagnosis || Psychotic disorders¦Depressive symptoms are a common associated feature of chronic psychotic disorders (e.g., schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, delusional disorder). A separate diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder is not made if the symptoms occur only during the course of the psychotic disorder (including residual phases).
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Differential Diagnosis || Depressive or bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition¦Persistent depressive disorder must be distinguished from a depressive or bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition. The diagnosis is depressive or bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition if the mood disturbance is judged, based on history, physical examination, or laboratory findings, to be attributable to the direct pathophysiological effects of a specific, usually chronic, medical condition (e.g., multiple sclerosis). If it is judged that the depressive symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of another medical condition, then the primary mental disorder (e.g., persistent depressive disorder) is recorded, and the medical condition is noted as a concomitant medical condition (e.g., diabetes mellitus).
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Differential Diagnosis || Substance/medication-induced depressive or bipolar disorder¦A substance/medication-induced depressive or bipolar and related disorder is distinguished from persistent depressive disorder when a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, a toxin) is judged to be etiologically related to the mood disturbance.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Differential Diagnosis || Personality disorders¦Often, there is evidence of a coexisting personality disturbance. When an individual's presentation meets the criteria for both persistent depressive disorder and a personality disorder, both diagnoses are given.
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦In the majority of menstrual cycles, at least five symptoms must be present in the final week before the onset of menses, start to improve within a few days after the onset of menses, and become minimal or absent in the week postmenses.
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦Marked affective lability (e.g., mood swings: feeling suddenly sad or tearful, or increased sensitivity to rejection).
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦Marked irritability or anger or increased interpersonal conflicts.
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦Marked depressed mood, feelings of hopelessness, or self-deprecating thoughts.
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦Marked anxiety, tension, and/or feelings of being keyed up or on edge.
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦Decreased interest in usual activities (e.g., work, school, friends, hobbies).
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦Subjective difficulty in concentration.
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦Lethargy, easy fatigability, or marked lack of energy.
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦Marked change in appetite; overeating; or specific food cravings.
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦Hypersomnia or insomnia.
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦A sense of being ovenwhelmed or out of control.
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦Physical symptoms such as breast tenderness or swelling, joint or muscle pain, a sensation of “bloating,” or weight gain.
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦The symptoms are associated with clinically significant distress or interference with work, school, usual social activities, or relationships with others (e.g., avoidance of social activities; decreased productivity and efficiency at work, school, or home).
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦The disturbance is not merely an exacerbation of the symptoms of another disorder, such as major depressive disorder, panic disorder, persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia), or a personality disorder (although it may co-occur with any of these disorders).
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦Criterion A should be confirmed by prospective daily ratings during at least two symptomatic cycles. (Note: The diagnosis may be made provisionally prior to this confirmation.)
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, other treatment) or another medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism).
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder | Diagnostic Features¦The essential features of premenstrual dysphoric disorder are the expression of mood lability, irritability, dysphoria, and anxiety symptoms that occur repeatedly during the premenstrual phase of the cycle and remit around the onset of menses or shortly thereafter. These symptoms may be accompanied by behavioral and physical symptoms. Symptoms must have occurred in most of the menstrual cycles during the past year and must have an adverse effect on work or social functioning. The intensity and/or expressivity of the accompanying symptoms may be closely related to social and cultural background characteristics of the affected female, family perspectives, and more specific factors such as religious beliefs, social tolerance, and female gender role issues.
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder | Diagnostic Features¦Typically, symptoms peak around the time of the onset of menses. Although it is not uncommon for symptoms to linger into the first few days of menses, the individual must have a symptom-free period in the follicular phase after the menstrual period begins. While the core symptoms include mood and anxiety symptoms, behavioral and somatic symptoms commonly also occur. However, the presence of physical and/or behavioral symptoms in the absence of mood and/or anxious symptoms is not sufficient for a diag­nosis. Symptoms are of comparable severity (but not duration) to those of another mental disorder, such a^ a major depressive episode or generalized anxiety disorder. In order to confirm a provisional diagnosis, daily prospective symptom ratings are required for at least two symptomatic cycles.
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder | Development and Course¦Onset of premenstrual dysphoric disorder can occur at any point after menarche. Incidence of new cases over a 40-month follow-up period is 2.5% (95% confidence interval = 1.7-3.7). Anecdotally, many individuals, as they approach menopause, report that symptoms worsen. Symptoms cease after menopause, although cyclical hormone replacement can trigger the re-expression of symptoms.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Differential Diagnosis || Premenstrual syndrome¦Premenstrual syndrome differs from premenstrual dysphoric disorder in that a minimum of five symptoms is not required, and there is no tipulation of affective symptoms for individuals who have premenstrual syndrome. This condition may be more common than premenstrual dysphoric disorder, although the estimated prevalence of premenstrual syndrome varies. While emenstrual syndrome shares the feature of symptom expression during the premenstrual phase of the menstrual cycle, it is generally considered to be less severe than premenstrual dysphoric disorder. The presence of physical or ehavioral symptoms in the premenstruum, without the required affective symptoms, likely meets criteria for premenstrual syndrome and not for premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Differential Diagnosis || Dysmenorrhea¦Dysmenorrhea is a syndrome of painful menses, but this is distinct from a syndrome characterized by affective changes. Moreover, symptoms of ysmenorrhea begin with the onset of menses, whereas symptoms of premenstrual dysphoric disorder, by definition, begin before the onset of menses, even if they linger into the first few days of menses.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Differential Diagnosis || Bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder, and persistent depressive disorder dysthymia)¦Many women with (either naturally occurring or substance/medicationinduced) bipolar or major depressive disorder or persistent depressive disorder believe that they have premenstrual dysphoric disorder. However, when they chart symptoms, they realize that the symptoms do not follow a premenstrual pattern. Women with another mental disorder may experience chronic symptoms or intermittent symptoms that are unrelated to menstrual cycle phase. However, because the onset of menses constitutes a memorable event, they may report that symptoms occur only during the premenstruum or that symptoms worsen premenstrually. This is one of the rationales for the requirement that symptoms be confirmed by daily prospective ratings. he process of differential diagnosis, particularly if the clinician relies on retrospective symptoms only, is made more difficult because of the overlap between symptoms of premenstrual dysphoric disorder and some other diagnoses. The verlap of symptoms is particularly salient for differentiating premenstrual dysphoric disorder from major depressive episodes, persistent depressive disorder, bipolar disorders, and borderline personality disorder. However, the rate of personality disorders is no higher in individuals with premenstrual dysphoric disorder than in those without the disorder.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) | Differential Diagnosis || Use of hormonal treatments¦Some women who present with moderate to severe premenstrual symptoms may be using hormonal treatments, including hormonal ontraceptives. If such symptoms occur after initiation of exogenous hormone use, the symptoms ay be due to the use of hormones rather than to the underlying condition of premenstrual dysphoriq disorder. If the woman stops ormones and the symptoms disappear, this is consistent with substance/medication-induced depressive disorder.
Substance/Medication-Induced Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦A prominent and persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical picture and is characterized by depressed mood or markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities.
Substance/Medication-Induced Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦The symptoms preceded the onset of the substance/medication use; the symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other evidence suggesting the existence of an independent non-substance/medication-induced depressive disorder (e.g., a history of recurrent non-substance/medication-related episodes).
Substance/Medication-Induced Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
Substance/Medication-Induced Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Criteria¦The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Substance/Medication-Induced Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Features¦The diagnostic features of substance/medication-induced depressive disorder include the symptoms of a depressive disorder, such as major depressive disorder; however, the depressive symptoms are associated with the ingestion, injection, or inhalation of a substance (e.g., drug of abuse, toxin, psychotropic medication, other medication), and the depressive symptoms persist beyond the expected length of physiological effects, intoxication, or withdrawal period. As evidenced by clinical history, physical examination, or laboratory findings, the relevant depressive disorder should have developed during or within 1 month after use of a substance that is capable of producing the depressive disorder. In addition, the diagnosis is not better explained by an independent depressive disorder. Evidence of an independent depressive disorder includes the depressive disorder preceded the onset of ingestion or withdrawal from the substance; the depressive disorder persists beyond a substantial period of time after the cessation of substance use; or other evidence suggests the existence of an independent non-substance/ medication-induced depressive disorder. This diagnosis should not be made when symptoms occur exclusively during the course of a delirium. The depressive disorder associated with the substance use, intoxication, or withdrawal must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning to qualify for this diagnosis.
Substance/Medication-Induced Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Features¦Some medications (e.g., stimulants, steroids, L-dopa, antibiotics, central nervous system drugs, dermatological agents, chemotherapeutic drugs, immunological agents) can induce depressive mood disturbances. Clinical judgment is essential to determine whether the medication is truly associated with inducing the depressive disorder or whether a primary depressive disorder happened to have its onset while the person was receiving the treatment. For example, a depressive episode that developed within the first several weeks of beginning alpha-methyldopa (an antihypertensive agent) in an individual with no history of major depressive disorder would qualify for the diagnosis of medication-induced depressive disorder. In some cases, a previously established condition (e.g., major depressive disorder, recurrent) can recur while the individual is coincidentally  taking a medication that has the capacity to cause depressive symptoms (e.g., L-dopa, oral contraceptives). In such cases, the clinician must make a judgment as to whether the medication is causative in this particular situation.
Substance/Medication-Induced Depressive Disorder | Diagnostic Features¦A substance/medication-induced depressive disorder is distinguished from a primary depressive disorder by considering the onset, course, and other factors associated with the substance use. There must be evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of substance use, abuse, intoxication, or withdrawal prior to the onset of the depressive disorder. The withdrawal state for some substances can be relatively protracted, and thus intense depressive symptoms can last for a long period after the cessation of substance use.
Substance/Medication-Induced Depressive Disorder | Development and Course¦A depressive disorder associated with the use of substance (i.e., alcohol, illicit drugs, or a prescribed treatment for a mental disorder or another medical condition) must have its onset while the individual is using the substance or during withdrawal, if there is a withdrawal syndrome associated with the substance. Most often, the depressive disorder has its onset within the first few weeks or 1 month of use of the substance. Once the substance is discontinued, the depressive symptoms usually remit within days to several weeks, depending on the half-life of the substance/medication and the presence of a withdrawal syndrome. If symptoms persist 4 weeks beyond the expected time course of withdrawal of a particular substance/medication, other causes for the depressive mood symptoms should be considered.
Substance/Medication-Induced Depressive Disorder | Development and Course¦Although there are a few prospective controlled trials examining the association of depressive symptoms with use of a medication, most reports are from postmarketing surveillance studies, retrospective observational studies, or case reports, making evidence of causality difficult to determine. Substances implicated in medication-induced depressive disorder, with varying degrees of evidence, include antiviral agents (efavirenz), cardiovascular agents (clonidine, guanethidine, methyldopa, reserpine), retinoic acid derivatives (isotretinoin), antidepressants, anticonvulsants, anti-migraine agents (triptans), antipsychotics, hormonal agents (corticosteroids, oral contraceptives, gonadotropinreleasing hormone agonists, tamoxifen), smoking cessation agents (varenicline), and immunological agents (interferon). However, other potential substances continue to emerge as new compounds are synthesized. A history of such substance use may help increase diagnostic certainty.
Substance/Medication-Induced Depressive Disorder | Differential Diagnosis || Substance intoxication and withdrawal¦Depressive symptoms occur commonly in substance intoxicahon and substance withdrawal, and the diagnosis of the substance-specific intoxication or withdrawal will usually suffice to categorize the symptom presentation. A diagnosis of substance-induced depressive disorder should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or substance withdrawal when the mood symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention. For example, dysphoric mood is a characteristic feature of cocaine withdrawal. Substance/medication-induced depressive disorder should be diagnosed instead of cocaine withdrawal only if the mood disturbance is substantially more intense or longer lasting than what is usually encountered with cocaine withdrawal and is sufficiently severe to be a separate focus of attention and treatment.
Substance/Medication-Induced Depressive Disorder | Differential Diagnosis || Primary depressive disorder¦A substance/medication-induced depressive disorder is distinguished from a primary depressive disorder by the fact that a substance is judged to be etiologically related to the symptoms, as described earlier (see section "Development and Course" for this disorder).
Substance/Medication-Induced Depressive Disorder | Differential Diagnosis || Depressive disorder due to another medical condition¦Because individuals with other medical conditions often take medications for those conditions, the clinician must consider the possibility that the mood symptoms are caused by the physiological consequences of the medical condition rather than the medication, in which case depressive disorder due to another medical condition is diagnosed. The history often provides Üie primary basis for such a judgment. At times, a change in the treatment for the other medical condition (e.g., medication substitution or discontinuation) may be needed to determine empirically whether the medication is the causative agent. If the clinician has ascertained that the disturbance is a function of both another medical condition and substance use or withdrawal, both diagnoses (i.e., depressive disorder due to another medical condition and substance/medication-induced depressive disorder) may be given. When there is insufficient evidence to determine whether the depressive symptoms are associated with substance (including a medication) ingestion or withdrawal or with another medical condition or are primary (i.e., not a function of either a substance or another medical condition), a diagnosis of other specified depressive disorder or unspecified depressive disorder would be indicated.
Depressive Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition | Diagnostic Criteria¦A prominent and persistent period of depressed mood or markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities that predominates in the clinical picture.
Depressive Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition | Diagnostic Criteria¦There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another medical condition.
Depressive Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition | Diagnostic Criteria¦The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., adjustment disorder, with depressed mood, in which the stressor is a serious medical condition).
Depressive Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition | Diagnostic Criteria¦The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
Depressive Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition | Diagnostic Criteria¦The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Depressive Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition | Diagnostic Features¦The essential feature of depressive disorder due to another medical condition is a prominent and persistent period of depressed mood or markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities that predominates in the clinical picture (Criterion A) and that is thought to be related to the direct physiological effects of another medical condition (Criterion B). In determining whether the mood disturbance is due to a general medical condition, the clinician must first establish the presence of a general medical condition. Further, the clinician must establish that the mood disturbance is etiologically related to the general medical condition through a physiological mechanism. A careful and comprehensive assessment of multiple factors is necessary to make this judgment. Although there are no infallible guidelines for determining whether the relationship between the mood disturbance and the general medical condition is etiological, several considerations provide some guidance in this area. One consideration is the presence of a temporal association between the onset, exacerbation, or remission of the general medical condition and that of the mood disturbance. A second consideration is the presence of features that are atypical of primary Mood Disorders (e.g., atypical age at onset or course or absence of family history). Evidence from the literature that suggests that there can be a direct association between the general medical condition in question and the development of mood symptoms can provide a useful context in the assessment of a particular situation.
Depressive Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition | Deveiopment and Course¦Following stroke, the onset of depression appears to be very acute, occurring within 1 day or a few days of the cerebrovascular accident (CVA) in the largest case series. However, in some cases, onset of the depression is weeks to months following the CVA. In the largest series, the duration of the major depressive episode following stroke was 9-11 months on average. Similarly, in Huntington's disease the depressive state comes quite early in the course of the illness. With Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease, it often precedes the major motor impairments and cognitive impairments associated with each condition. This is more prominently the case for Huntington's disease, in which depression is considered to be the first neuropsychiatric symptom. There is some observational evidence that depression is less common as the dementia of Huntington's disease progresses.
Depressive Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition | Differential Diagnosis || Depressive disorders not due to another medical condition¦Determination of whether a medical condition accompanying a depressive disorder is causing the disorder depends on a) the absence of an episode(s) of depressive episodes prior to the onset of the medical condition, b) the probability that the associated medical condition has a potential to promote or cause a depressive disorder, and c) a course of the depressive symptoms shortly after the onset oi^ worsening of the medical condition, especially if the depressive symptoms remit near the time that the medical disorder is effectively treated or remits.
Depressive Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition | Differential Diagnosis || Medication-induced depressive disorder¦An important caveat is that some medical conditions are treated with medications (e.g., steroids or alpha interferon) that can induce depressive or manic symptoms. In these cases, clinical judgment, based on all the evidence in hand, is the best way to try to separate the most likely and/or the most important of two etiological factors (i.e., association with the medical condition vs. a substance-induced syndrome).
Depressive Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition | Differential Diagnosis || Adjustment disorders¦It is important to differentiate a depressive episode from an adjustment disorder, as the onset of the medical condition is in itself a life stressor that could bring on either an adjustment disorder or an episode of major depression. The major differentiating elements are the pervasiveness the depressive picture and the number and quality of the depressive symptoms that the patient reports or demonstrates on the mental status examination. The differential diagnosis of the associated medical conditions is relevant but largely beyond the scope of the present manual.
